Functions that execute a bunch of code are very well and good but often we want to get a value back
from a function.
In this lesson we're going to talk about how functions return a value and get a result back.
Returning a particular value is actually why we often call a function in the first place.
The reason we're calling the reed CSB function here is because we want to pass a CSP file and get our
data as an output and store that data in a variable.
Let's look at the mechanics of Returning values more closely in our Get milk example in this case where
supplying an amount of money as an input.
And we're using our input to make a calculation.
This part is the same as before we're dividing the amount of money by the price of milk to calculate
the litres of milk to buy.
So the question is how do we return the result of this calculation.
And the answer is that we use a keyword the return keyword followed by the value of what we want to
return.
We write return letters that would return.
It's actually a python keyword when Python hits this line of code where it says return it will exit
the function and it will return whatever result comes after that keyword.
So in our example here Get milk is outputting the value inside litres.
The call to get milk is actually the same as before.
We have the function name and the value for an argument say twenty point five.
However if we run our Python code just like this our output is is lost.
Ha.
Get milk function is returning a value but we're not storing this value anywhere.
So what you'll typically find is that when a value is returned by a function we're gonna be storing
that value in a variable in this case our variable called amount is not holding on to twenty point five
divided by one point one five or around seventeen point eight but so much for the theory.
Let's put this into practice.
Suppose you're working for a cutting edge Silicon Valley company and you're building a calculator.
You are the engineering lead on the team and you have been assigned the incredibly important task of
programming the multiplication bunch as a challenge.
Can you do the following in the Jupiter notebook.
Create a function called times and have this function take two inputs it needs to multiply these two
inputs together and provide the result as an output of the function.
Also you need to test this function that it works so call your function and multiply three point 1 4
and 5 point 0 9 store this value in a variable called no test and print out the value of test below
the cell I'll give you a few seconds to pause the video
you're ready.
Here's the solution.
The first thing we're gonna do is define our function.
So we're gonna use the keyword def.
We're gonna give a function a name and call it times.
Now we're going to provide the two parameters say x and y you can call these parameters anything you
want to by the way.
We then have the column hit enter and say we want to store the result of the multiplication in a variable
so we'll see result equals X times Y and then to output the value of this function we'll go with return
result.
Notice how return is colored in green because it's a python keyword.
Now suppose you called your parameters a and b instead of X and Y then you've got to be consistent.
You've got to have a and b inside the body of the function as well.
So now I'm done with my function.
I'm going to hit shift enter and I'm ready to test it.
So I'm going to call times three point one for comma five point O nine and hit shift enter.
Our function is working as expected.
Now we said we'd store the value of the output in a variable so we'd say test is equal to the Times
function and then we can print out test for head shift and to now we see the value of our test variable
printed below the cell.
Now we can actually simplify the code inside our times function a little bit.
In fact we don't need this extra line of code right here.
So I can comment it out with a hashtag and instead of returning result I can return the calculation
directly I can see a times b if I hit shift enter on the cell and then hit shift enter again on the
cell below.
I can see that my function is working my output is unchanged if you've decided to write your function
just like this then you're doing the calculation on the same line as the return keyword.
And this is absolutely fine.
Okay excellent.
So let's continue our little story of working at the Silicon Valley tech company and connect this lesson
with our previous lesson on data types now that you've written your function.
You've probably submitted your calculator code by now to the project team and a few moments later your
boss an accomplished python programmer will walk over and say hey I've looked at your code and I've
got a question for you.
Have you watched the Monty Python movie for the quest for the Holy Grail.
He then pushes you aside from your keyboard and types in times parentheses single quotes and I single
quote comma for and after typing this code into your Jupiter notebook he smiles and walks away.
Let's see what happens when we run this code.
If I had shift enter I see the word knee displayed four times below our cell.
Now this is unexpected right.
The Times function does something completely different now that multiplication symbol is not multiplying
when we're passing in a string.
The multiplication sign in fact is repeating a sequence.
And what this shows is that the python code doesn't really care about the specific data types.
It's running on.
In this case both numbers and strings support this time symbol both numbers and strings have some sort
of operation that uses this multiplication symbol.
Now what this means in practice is that we as the developers when we're writing our Python code have
to run some tests and be aware of the kind of data types that we're working with and also to detect
errors.
A reasonable question to ask as well as this is a bad thing and why was our boss not angry when our
code did something really weird.
And the answer to that question is Python is really all about flexibility ideally Python code should
not really care about the types.
And this is in contrast to other programming languages like C++ or Java.
Python is meant to be flexible.
This is a core part of the Python philosophy in fact returning to our topic of functions.
This is a good time to review and summarize the three flavors of functions that we've encountered so
far.
We've seen functions with no inputs and no outputs.
We've seen functions with inputs and we've seen functions with both outputs and inputs.
When defining a function you always have to use that.
Def keyword then you have the name of the function followed by the parentheses and then the semicolon
also very important is that the next line the one below the header in the body of the function is indented.
I recommend using force bases but most text editors will indent this automatically for you.
Now when you have inputs or parameters they go between the parentheses following the function name the
parameters are like placeholders.
They're essentially a variable with a name that gets a value when the function is called the cool thing
about parameters is that you can use a parameter inside the body of the function and when you have more
than one parameter you separate each parameter with a comma finally we encountered functions that have
both inputs and outputs.
The key here is that functions with outputs have a return statement the output is whatever comes after
the return.
Keyword and the way to remember this is that if you're ever dating a programmer and you tell them to
go to a supermarket and buy some milk and they never come back it's because you haven't told them to
return anything.
So over the past couple of lessons we've worked quite a bit with different kinds of functions before
we move on.
Let's talk a little bit about the big picture for a second.
I'm sure that at this point you're starting to see how functions really help with structuring code instead
of copy pasting a bunch of code we can stick a bunch of instructions into a single function and then
just call that one function.
That's what's called code reuse and code reuse basically helps you avoid copy pasting also because functions
can have parameters we can call them over and over again while supplying different kinds of inputs.
So in psychic learn we wrote a linear regression that looked at movie budgets and movie revenue and
we can run linear regressions over and over again on different kinds of data that X and that y in that
fit function can have different values and we can reuse the code that fits our regression model.
Again this is code reuse in action but there's also a more subtle advantage functions allow us to split
up complex tasks and by splitting up a complex task we get more manageable parts.
For example in this notebook theoretically we could have had one function that I don't know past all
our data and then generated the graph and then did the regression but we didn't have one line of God
code that did everything.
Instead we had different functions that were responsible for different pieces of the workflow so functions
are a design tool for organizing our code.
We've actually encountered this idea before with the packages that we looked at.
So our pandas package had a bunch of different files that made up the package.
Our pandas module did not consist of one enormous stock P Why file the code instead was split up into
a bunch of smaller files and each of these files had a specific job.
So as we're writing our own code we're going to be battling the same enemies as every other developer
out there.
We're gonna be fighting change and complexity change and complexity are the reason why good design and
good structure for code is key.
And one thing that developers have learned over the past decades is that splitting up a task into smaller
more manageable parts is really important and it helps a lot on a small scale.
This splitting up of different functionality is accomplished by putting code into functions and on a
bigger scale.
This is accomplished by splitting up bits of code into different files.
The rationale behind both of these strategies is the same.
They're about managing complexity and on that note I'm going to leave you with a little Python Easter
egg in your Jupiter notebook type.
Import this and he'd shift into you will be greeted by the Zen of Python by Tim Peters.
Find two favorite lines by a longshot shot.
Simple is better than complex and complex is better than complicated.
And on that bombshell I'll see you in the next lesson.